Title: Everyday Observations: What's the Point?
Date: 2014-07-06 20:30
Category: Ideas & Innovation
Tags: technology, habits, everyday observations, everyday technology, design, experience, UI/UX
Slug: EO-whats-the-point
disqus_identifier: EO-whats-the-point
disqus_url: http://santoshsankar.com/posts/2014/Jul/06/EO-whats-the-point/
Author: Santosh Sankar
Summary: Everyday Observations generally teach me three things: how technology changes us over time, manage our expectations and in turn frames our criticisms to be more realistic and to develop empathy for creators and other users of a product.

Last week I penned piece last week that I had dubbed Everyday Observations. This afternoon, I was in the middle of typing yet another piece by the same name but thought it would make sense to highlight it's significance.

<div style="background-color:#fff;display:inline-block;font-family:'Helvetica Neue',Arial,sans-serif;color:#a7a7a7;font-size:11px;width:100%;max-width:508px;min-width:300px;"><div style="overflow:hidden;position:relative;height:0;padding:66.535433% 0 49px 0;width:100%;"><iframe src="//embed.gettyimages.com/embed/474419287?et=-CY-eezYSCRCt7g6uibMLA&sig=5wiT7RcCc8aAV2WDWBiEj7IG1Oi7g9kVyXrC-A4frH4=" width="508" height="387" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="display:inline-block;position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;"></iframe></div><p style="margin:0;"></p><div style="padding:0;margin:4px 0 0 10px;text-align:left;"><a href="http://www.gettyimages.com/detail/474419287" target="_blank" style="color:#a7a7a7;text-decoration:none;font-weight:normal !important;border:none;display:inline-block;">#474419287</a> / <a href="http://www.gettyimages.com" target="_blank" style="color:#a7a7a7;text-decoration:none;font-weight:normal !important;border:none;display:inline-block;">gettyimages.com</a></div></div>

# The Point of Everyday Observations

1. **Reflect on how technology changes us.** Technology changes us little by little. As humans, we are what I would refer to as "*dynamic*. " As we adopt technology, the way we live and operate is slowly altered, little by little. As this occurs over generations, we will evolve to form new behaviors and are conditioned to new interactions. While none of us will observe such a generational shift, we can see these small changes in our everyday routines. These small routines when accumulated overtime for a single activity could be deemed as evolution. For example, when reading on the East River today with my friend, he marked his page but I simple shut my iPad case. I quickly looked down and realized how with the advent of eBooks, something as little as bookmarking is eliminated. Will my grand kids or great grand kids ever know what a bookmark is? Everyday Observations is a way to actively record and reflect on how even the simplest technologies impact us.

2. **Manage our expectations which helps to frame realistic criticisms while simultaneously being appreciative of technology and how it has advanced.** With most things in life, we are often times overcritical without pausing to observe, analyze and appreciate the current state of things. I have realized that when we're cognizant of where technology is today vs where it was, we tend to develop a clear understanding for the state of technology and then probe how it has advanced. This reflection and appreciation helps us manage our expectations (like not long enough battery life on our phones) and in turn frames our criticisms to be more realistic. Advancements come with time and in an era where we are so impatient for the next big convenience or gadget, it helps to keep realistic expectations which helps provide constructive feedback while also appreciating current offerings.

3. **Develop empathy with the designers, developers and other users of a product.** I am spending part of my time to understand the product management process and as such, I touch on all aspects relating to planning, design, development and maintenance. When developing a product and the experience, designers take time to understand their users and their problems to deliver the best product possible. It helps for everyone who criticizes products to develop this kind of empathy with other stakeholders. Thinking about a piece of technology and why it was built a certain way and observing how you and others use it is quite powerful. Plus, by seeing how another person uses a certain app or gadget, it might show you certain efficiencies or new uses you never thought of. It could even reveal some (really a very small taste) of the challenges product teams face when trying to build a quality product-- an appreciation of sorts for the creators.

In what turned out to be a post I had not planned, these points seem to the three things I benefit from when considering an Everyday Observation.  Perhaps as I grow and learn more general learnings will be revealed from this type of reflection and commentary.