Title: Importance of Reflection
Date: 2014-09-16 19:00
Category: Personal Development
Tags: reflection, mentorship, personal growth, personal development, education, knowledge
Slug: importance-of-reflection
Author: Santosh Sankar
Summary: Being a big proponent of mentorship, I share my views on being a good mentor from my four short years of experience. I have come to learn that teaching is one of the best forms of learning and plays an important role in enjoying and succeeding as a mentor.

For those who follow along, I'm a big proponent of building a network of mentors to aide in personal development. I think an important part of that experience is to also give back-- impart knowledge to those seeking a similar skill set and advice from someone with your background. Even away from formal programs, I'm always open to helping colleagues and peers in an informal setting. I have come to learn that teaching is one of the best forms of learning and plays an important role in enjoying and succeeding as a mentor.

<div style="background-color:#fff;display:inline-block;font-family:'Helvetica Neue',Arial,sans-serif;color:#a7a7a7;font-size:11px;width:100%;max-width:358px;"><div style="overflow:hidden;position:relative;height:0;padding:133.519553% 0 0 0;width:100%;"><iframe src="//embed.gettyimages.com/embed/108359342?et=heya5q3qTNBhdooTrZ-zVA&sig=meCYK9OATZY-Lgh7E6bJa_u_lABlz8ZHAvpcVoFcOKM=" width="358" height="478" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="display:inline-block;position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;"></iframe></div><p style="margin:0;"></p><div style="padding:0;margin:0 0 0 10px;text-align:left;"><a href="http://www.gettyimages.com/detail/108359342" target="_blank" style="color:#a7a7a7;text-decoration:none;font-weight:normal !important;border:none;display:inline-block;">#108359342</a> / <a href="http://www.gettyimages.com" target="_blank" style="color:#a7a7a7;text-decoration:none;font-weight:normal !important;border:none;display:inline-block;">gettyimages.com</a></div></div>

A few weeks ago, the alumni mentor program at my alma mater began. I am fortunate enough to be an alumni mentor and work with a current student to help her achieve her goals. From my experience, an important part of the mentorship is to set a baseline of goals and expectations from both sides. However, there are other important points that can influence the relationship. As a young mentor, I thought I would share my own in an effort to share and refine my approach

## My Approach

1. **Express empathy.** My best mentors have always recalled their emotions, feelings and perceptions from similar experiences and offered their advice. I think it's important for mentors to not sandbox themselves but place themselves in their mentee's position. If as a mentor you are unable to do that, that means you need more contact with your mentee to understand their schedule, demands, goals and interests. For example, I always try to recall myself at 19 years old, trying to juggle academics, personal life, social life, extra curriculars, etc. The sensitivity shown as a mentor can really help alleviate the mentee's stress and make them more receptive to honest, open dialogue.

2. **Be candid, respectful and thorough with feedback.** This is a part of my personality. I hate receiving sugarcoated feedback and in turn never sugarcoat my feedback. That doesn't mean one should be disrespectful or crass in their constructive criticism. If something needs improvement, address it clearly, why it needs improvement and a clear, easy to follow plan to refine it. As a mentor, follow up during future discussions is important as well.

3. **A Mentee-owned relationship.** I believe that the mentee should own the relationship. They should be on top of dialogue, planning calls or meetings as well as discussion points for check-ins. This isn't to say that mentor shouldn't check-in or ask for a call but the responsibility should be with the person seeking advice. This helps instill relationship, communication, time management and meeting-planning skills. When checking in, I generally send over links to interesting content or events which could serve as fodder for great conversation, personal development and to also geek out over fun topics.

4. **Leverage your network.** Often times I get questions to which I do not have a clear answer. It happens, I do my research and follow up but one of the most useful resources has been my own network. For example, perhaps your mentee has a question on daily routines for a specific industry or making a transition into a different role. Checking LinkedIn or your Contacts can help identify friendly and useful individuals who could opine based on their experiences. The best part? You are helping your mentee and fellow peers expand their network-- connecting people is a position of power in this world.

5. **Most importantly- learn and have fun!** I feel that people enter a mentorship position without keeping an open mind to learn. We can learn so much from our mentees. Some things I've learn over these four short years: how to use new tools/apps, creative/unorthodox ways of tackling data analysis, improved interpersonal skills, solving unusual challenges, motivation to improve a certain skill, etc. Having fun is also important-- don't keep discussions rigid! Talk about mutual interests, cool things mentioned in the news, sports, etc. 

I tried to consolidate my ideas into five salient points but there are obviously many different perspectives people subscribe to. I have tailored my thoughts to my specific involvement with students at Penn State but these basic tenets could extend across to any relationship. How do you approach your mentor/mentee relationship?