Title: A Tale of Two Markets
Date: 2014-09-17 20:00
Category: Early Stage Investing
Tags: public markets, private markets, burn rates, start up financials, early stage investing
Slug: a-tale-of-two-markets
Author: Santosh Sankar
Summary: My thoughts as to why public investors might be more willing to tolerate "high burn" than private market investors. 

<div style="background-color:#fff;display:inline-block;font-family:'Helvetica Neue',Arial,sans-serif;color:#a7a7a7;font-size:11px;width:100%;max-width:507px;"><div style="overflow:hidden;position:relative;height:0;padding:66.666667% 0 0 0;width:100%;"><iframe src="//embed.gettyimages.com/embed/171998922?et=X1FG5HXxTf5zVqMNXn46_A&sig=OmcR8rSQMMoVWhipZge3bj7STkbEKehvANbdqHgPqd0=" width="507" height="338" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="display:inline-block;position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;"></iframe></div><p style="margin:0;"></p><div style="padding:0;margin:0 0 0 10px;text-align:left;"><a href="http://www.gettyimages.com/detail/171998922" target="_blank" style="color:#a7a7a7;text-decoration:none;font-weight:normal !important;border:none;display:inline-block;">#171998922</a> / <a href="http://www.gettyimages.com" target="_blank" style="color:#a7a7a7;text-decoration:none;font-weight:normal !important;border:none;display:inline-block;">gettyimages.com</a></div></div>

A popular topic of discussion this week among private tech investors and the broader community has been Bill Gurley's <a href="http://online.wsj.com/articles/venture-capitalist-sounds-alarm-on-silicon-valley-risk-1410740054" target="_blank">perspective</a> on high cash burn rates amongst start ups. Interestingly enough, several other VCs chimed <a href="http://online.wsj.com/articles/startup-risk-bill-gurleys-warning-triggers-debate-in-silicon-valley-1410900716" target="_blank">in</a> including, Fred Wilson, Tomasz Tunguz and Jeff Clavier to name a few. I think it's good reading for anyone looking to learn more and stay abreast of trends in the business. 

This morning, Mattermark CEO/Founder Danielle Morrill <a href= "https://medium.com/@DanielleMorrill/i-have-a-hunch-about-vc-risk-6b68a9d84070" target ="_blank">published</a> her perspective as it relates to Gurley's interview. Alongside it, she provides a data set of sales/expense ratios from recent IPOs. Give it a read before moving on.

These two points from Danielle resonated with me the most:

> This might be the best argument for Uber, and other high burn startups with meaningful cash flow, to go public. The public markets seem to be much more accepting of this kind of spending for growth than venture capitalists.

> Most venture capital investors divest of their holdings once their companies go public and pay distributions back to their LPs, so maybe these “high burn” companies — who are operating at the scale of public companies without actually being public — are simply out of many private market focused investor’s realm of operational expertise and risk tolerance.

I took sometime to postulate as to why public investors might be more willing to tolerate "high burn" than private market investors. 

* **Expertise.** Like Danielle mentioned, part of it comes down to expertise. Public investors understand how to form a mosaic of information and as a majority, are comfortable not being in control. There are a subset of activists who do chime in when during periods of mismanagement to catalyze change and in my opinion play a role in the long-term efficiency of markets.
Additionally, over several cycles, companies need to spend for their future growth. Public markets seem to have a stronger level of comfort regarding this and any deviation from expectations can be dealt with more easily due to the liquid nature of public markets (see below).

* **Liquidity.** The big difference between public and private markets is the role liquidity plays in risk management. In the public market, if cash burn continues to increase without sustainable growth, an investor can sell. However, in the private market, if things take a turn for the worse (and stay that way), it's more difficult to manage losses. However, it's important to note that some private investors (speaking in a broad sense from early stage through to LBO) believe that part of their alpha is generated by this illiquidity premium.

* **Psychology.** The fear of "missing out" on that huge opportunity could partially play a role in accepting cash burn. The idea of being able to capitalize on an extended period of growth in exchange for upfront spending could be quite attractive. While other investors might sell out based on their expectations, the idea that a patient, contrarian investor could be rewarded might further propel the acceptance of cash burn.

	A basic tenant of behavioral finance is that  we "hurt" more over the loss of $25.00 than we "celebrate" a gain of $25.00. Similarly, the idea of losing out on an opportunity to double one's investment could result in some "pain." This is a point that really differentiates the great from the good-- Buffett likens good investing to baseball--
	
>The stock market is a no-called-strike game. You don’t have to swing at everything–you can wait for your pitch. The problem when you are a money manager is that your fans keep yelling, ‘Swing, you bum!’

* **State of the Markets.** We are in a period of low yields, large buybacks, dividends, geopolitical uncertainty, etc. There are pockets of growth but alpha is largely hard to come by. There are certain strategies that have worked but traditional money managers and long/short guys likely do not possess the expertise to execute merger arb, activist or macro strategies. Instead, they are willing to buy-in earlier (like in the case of Uber and others) or invest at IPO with an understanding and tolerance for short-term losses which could result in alpha down the road. This idea of above-market performance has ripple effects for a fund manager: 1) higher performance-based pay, 2) attract more AUM, 3) higher AUM means higher management fees, 4) prestige -- it's a big circular reference. In a world measured in hundred of millions or billions, a few years of losses measured in the single or double-digit millions for investment profits in the billions might to seem too bad.

Having been involved in the public markets since my freshman year of college and long-term aspirations to build, mentor and invest in upstarts, these relationships are fascinating. Just my two cents on this topic- open to hear everyone else's perspective to refine and augment my thought process. 

FYI- returns are generally decomposed in two parts:

1. **Beta:** the amount of return attributable to the broader market
2. **Alpha:** the amount of return attributable to specific investments (or the investment manager's expertise)