Title: Uber Chats
Date: 2014-12-03 11:00
Category: Everyday Observations
Tags: weekly reads, current events, innovation, digital, disrupt, products, social, big data, security, Internet of Things, mobile, fintech, startups
Slug: uber-chats
Author: Santosh Sankar
Summary: I'm a huge fan of Uber and other sharing services that have taken antiquated businesses and injected them with a dose of innovative which has been aided by mobile. While it makes sense to speak and read what investors and executives at major companies say to understand Uber and the marketplace model in general, it's great to get a driver's perspective.

When I use Uber, I usually spend about 50% of the time chatting with my driver. I learn about their backgrounds, why they opted for their current job and once in a while, learn more about Uber and the marketplace-model.

<div class="getty embed image" style="background-color:#fff;display:inline-block;font-family:'Helvetica Neue',Arial,sans-serif;color:#a7a7a7;font-size:11px;width:100%;max-width:594px;"><div style="overflow:hidden;position:relative;height:0;padding:66.666667% 0 0 0;width:100%;"><iframe src="//embed.gettyimages.com/embed/453253488?et=V1y8OzUmQYV9BqKFaoF6WQ&flyout=on&sig=hGKqcmjLne5_QVBLBsC_qfvAHUsWYAAAMiU3jKIiz7s=" width="594" height="396" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="display:inline-block;position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;"></iframe></div><p style="margin:0;"></p><div style="padding:0;margin:0 0 0 10px;text-align:left;"><a href="http://www.gettyimages.com/detail/453253488" target="_blank" style="color:#a7a7a7;text-decoration:none;font-weight:normal !important;border:none;display:inline-block;">#453253488</a> / <a href="http://www.gettyimages.com" target="_blank" style="color:#a7a7a7;text-decoration:none;font-weight:normal !important;border:none;display:inline-block;">gettyimages.com</a></div></div>

During one of my recent drives, I had the privilege of riding with a driver rated 4.5+ on what he described as a count of over 2,000 rides-- we can call him "All-Star Driver." After my 20 minute ride, while I concluded that Uber in itself is still a work-in-progress (especially in light of the recent press attention around culture), two major points were surfaced from my conversation-

**New Drivers Aren't Necessarily Trained Well.** The largest new takeaway that I haven't ever heard was the point on training. With promises of making $60k+ a year, the All-Star Driver says that many people sign up with a car and are clueless in regards to navigation and service. He hit the nail on the head by also pointing out that Uber is incentivized to hire loads of drivers (in hopes of taking a cut of the fares).

I mentioned a driver who insisted I enter a cross street into the app before we departed and how it was frustrating for me-- entering in a cross street, really? what address do I enter? The All-Star Driver said it is likely because he was new to the city. He mentioned a time when he saw a driver come down the wrong side of the Street-- wow. This training might seem trivial, after all, if someone signs up to be a driver, one would think they know how to get around. In NYC, at least, part of the issue might be immigrant workers who haven't been long-time residents. A little help could go a long way here.

On the point of customer service, while I've never had a horrible experience with Uber, intermittent training could help. Points on how to deal with difficult passengers, not playing loud music, refraining from obnoxious conversation topics, etc could help. Tangentially related, there should be a focus on efficient service. I have ended up sitting there with a driver who weaves around for a couple extra bucks (in the name of speed) but end up burning 5-10 extra minutes, instead. At the end of the day, a focus on the customer is what matters-- sometimes people need a reminder.

**Still Tough to Make Ends Meet.** I brought this point up and while All-Star Driver didn't really make a huge deal, he did note that the $60k/year claim isn't true. While the majority of Uber drivers I've spoken to say they augment their income with Uber, it's still important to properly (and transparently) size the earnings potential for potential employees.

All-Star Driver broke it down by saying he would need to work about 14 hours per day for 7 days a week for roughly 50 weeks per year. Given the $60k is gross, I dug in on the expense side. Once the $60k comes in, the driver doesn't see anything before Uber and the management company take their cut. Then there's the cost of gas and cleaning which reduces that $60k even further (don't forget taxes!). When laid out in this manner, it seems like this earnings structure is no different than driving a yellow cab.

I'm a huge fan of Uber and other sharing services that have taken antiquated businesses and injected them with a dose of innovative which has been aided by mobile. While it makes sense to speak and read what investors and executives at major companies say to understand Uber and the marketplace model in general, it's great to get a driver's perspective.